Okay. Hi. So, my name is Boxy and um
it's been a while since I made a new
video. I first heard about YouTube when
I was in high school.
>> Hey, it's
>> I went to a party with Daniel and he
kissed me. Just kind of wondering what
is that? I have this really vague
memory. They have really long um
>> I believe it might have been the first
YouTube video ever.
>> It was and featured trunk enthusiast and
YouTube co-founder Javeed Karim. And it
ignited 20 years of liking, commenting,
and subscribing.
[Music]
20 million videos are uploaded to
YouTube every day, and the site's
estimated to account for about a fifth
of all internet traffic. In the US,
people spend more time watching YouTube
on TV than Netflix, Amazon, or all of
Disney's TV networks and streaming
services combined. But the world's
central repository of video content is
now taking a risky gamble while also
facing its first real competition in
years.
[Music]
>> The biggest threat for YouTube is that
someone could come along and do what
they did 20 years ago. And so with novel
threats knocking at its door, can a
wealthy grown-up YouTube still keep its
kids engaged?
>> You're still here.
[Music]
>> YouTube has a knack for survival. Should
humanity accidentally deploy a
planetwide exit strategy, Earth may well
just be old Nokia phones, Twinkies, and
YouTube servers. And it has youngsters
to thank for that. The vast majority of
teens consume YouTube content every
single day. Most of the products that
were popular when I was a teen are
either extinct or they're for the boomer
generation at this point.
>> Just imagine MySpace or MSN Messenger
holding prime real estate on billions of
our home screens.
>> The site was founded in 2005. Sharing
video online was just beginning.
YouTube provided this really easy way
for people to just seamlessly share
these little moments that might have
once been stuck in sort of home video
land.
Within a year, YouTube was serving 30
million videos a day to 9 million people
a month with about 30,000 new clips
being added every 24 hours.
Charlie,
>> broadband internet, advances in video
compression software, and tools like
Adobe Flash combined to help YouTube
become the internet's preferred way of
broadcasting itself.
>> One of their major reasons for the
success their first year was that people
could embed it into MySpace, which at
the time was incredibly popular,
>> although that made hosting and serving
up video files expensive. one of the
founders put up a a pretty major bill on
his personal credit card.
>> It had also caught the attention of some
deep pocketed businesses at a pivotal
stage in their own evolution.
>> Doodle was very worried they would
become obsolete if they did not have a
social media component to their
business.
>> So, it snapped up YouTube for $1.6
billion. enough for the founders to pay
off their credit cards, go back and look
at some more elephants and have change
to spare. And change really is the
operative word here. This was the
beginning of this sort of userenerated
internet.
So what had Google actually bought at
the time? A big viral success story was
Brie Avery, better known as the
character Lonely Girl 15.
>> Hi guys.
>> It tapped into what YouTube did best. I
don't really know how my parents would
react to this.
>> She was sort of talking to the audience
as if they knew her.
>> And countless other young people
achieved cult status doing the same,
including Boxy, aka actress Katherine
Wayne,
>> I was like, I am not Roland. I am Boxy.
You see the old taste makers that had
kind of determined what would be
invogue, that was starting to change.
And YouTube really catalyzed that shift.
Not without some irony and costly legal
crises though, thanks to YouTube's belly
full of copyrighted material from those
old taste makers.
>> And they interpreted this way that
listen, if someone's going to ask us to
take it down, we will. But until then,
we're going to keep it up.
>> That soon came to a head.
>> It's the latest round of charges and
countercharges in Viacom's billion
dollar copyright infringement lawsuit
against YouTube. Viacom ended up
accusing YouTube and Google of knowingly
putting up that copyright and making
money from it. After seven years of back
and forth, the companies eventually
settled. Still, YouTube needed to
convince the rest of the industry it was
legit. What it did change the direction
of the platform for the next decade and
so began act two.
Amid the Viacom ordeal and with a global
music scandal still in recent memory,
Google rolled out something called
content ID.
>> And that effectively is a piece of
software that can detect when
copyrighted material shows up in a video
and then it gives the owner the ability
to either remove that video or make
money from any ads that appear on that.
And sort of overnight that system
basically let YouTube coexist with the
record labels, with Hollywood studios,
with TV networks. And we saw this major
shift where they were willing to to go
to YouTube in part because they saw a
commercial pathway
and a lucrative one. Over the last 5
years, YouTube ads consistently made up
10 to 11% of all Alphabet's revenue,
which has roughly doubled in that time
from $183 billion to $350 billion in
2024.
That year, YouTube ad sales hit $ 36
billion, almost as much as Disney,
Paramount, Fox, and NBC Universal
combined.
[Music]
But back to our timeline. In 2010,
YouTube introduced the next key feature
that would lead to all that.
>> They built this format called the
skippable ad, which seems kind of
counterintuitive, but now we're all
familiar with this, right?
>> Skippable ads incentivized marketing
departments to create compelling promos
that people wouldn't want to ignore.
>> Whether you own one donkey or dozens, we
can help protect what matters most.
>> And then this,
>> when I grow up, I'mma be a supermodel.
In 2012, YouTube made this seismic
change in switching over to prioritize
what it's called watch time.
>> This disincentivized clickbaity videos
and encouraged users to upload stuff
people actually wanted to watch.
>> Beauty vlogging, makeup tutorials became
really popular. Video game live streams.
>> And that's in part why podcasts are
really popular on YouTube. People put it
on in the background and just keep it on
for hours and hours.
>> The total amount of time people spend
watching short clips remains
significant, but more times now given to
videos 20 minutes or longer than all the
little ones put together. Come to think
of it, we should probably have padded
this video out a bit more. Have a cat on
a keyboard.
In its second decade of life, YouTube's
enduring popularity with younger
audiences brought about new obstacles.
>> One of the most infamous crisis they had
to deal with was New Year's Eve 2018.
Logan Paul at the time was one of the
biggest YouTubers in the world had gone
to shoot this this series in Japan.
>> This forest is also known as the
Japanese suicide forest.
>> I should have never posted the video. I
am sorry.
>> YouTube toughened its content policies
after this, but vetting the 20 million
uploads it says users make each day is
notoriously difficult. There's been in
the mid2010s
terrorism content on YouTube that people
found was being advertised against and
that's just not something that any
advertiser wants.
>> You saw a major boycott of advertisers
at the start of 2017 around content
moderation issues. Most returned after
content rules were tightened further and
non-compliant videos were removed more
quickly. But YouTube now exists in a
political era, at least in the US, where
aggressive moderation is less popular.
>> Their trust and safety teams have been
really hit hard by layoffs in recent
years. YouTube and Google are both
trying to have a lighter touch, not
really moderate so heavily.
They'll need to deal with those
industry-wide responsibilities while
maintaining the unique loyalty of
YouTube's users and the 20 billion
videos they've uploaded and do so in the
face of unprecedented competition. That
will define how YouTube will do from
here on out in its third act.
[Music]
YouTube has many existential threats.
regulatory pressure, misinformation,
antirust issues,
>> and the new elephant in the room,
>> the massive repository of videos that
YouTube has built up through the years
has become this incredibly valuable
asset to train AI models. It doesn't
allow other companies to scrape its
data, but it kind of gives some wiggle
room that Google itself could be doing
the scraping for its own AI model.
>> And so it's a real moral dilemma. You
know, I in some extreme cases, people
think of it as stealing. And so now
there's a real fear among some creators
that they have unwittingly armed
artificial intelligence to replace them.
Google DeepMind has developed a video
generation AI model. And so you type in
whatever thing you want to see in a
video and then the AI model will
generate the actual content
>> or possibly just vast quantities of
junk, so-called AI slop. And you know,
as that takes over platforms like Google
search and YouTube, it is a challenge
for the platforms to wade through more
of this stuff.
>> Although the jury's out on whether this
is bad for YouTube.
>> Fundamentally, it's an advertising
company. And if there's more AI content
on there, there could just be more
advertising.
>> Talk to people inside the company. Their
explanation here is that they are
building these AI tools for creators
that are going to be incredibly
beneficial to them.
>> Things like translation and dubbing
which can help creators reach foreign
audiences. The
>> words I'm saying right now could be
instantaneously in Spanish in Mandarin.
But for anyone unhappy with Google's AI
strategy, there's now that real
alternative we mentioned.
>> Tik Tok has become probably the fiercest
competition that YouTube has faced in
its lifetime. Tik Tok is not only very
popular with the younger generation,
it's also probably the first platform to
come around and build up a successful
creator industry.
YouTube still pulls the greatest number
of teenage eyeballs, if you'll forgive
the horrific mental image, but Tik Tok
isn't far behind, prioritizing the
short, snappy, viral treats YouTube used
to feast on. YouTube really needs to
remain the go-to place for young people.
That has what has kept it at the center
of the conversation for so long.
It was a former executive at YouTube
that told me this. It was these three
different stages that every company goes
through. Joke, threat, obvious. In
YouTube's first years, it was kind of
seen as a joke. It was dogs on
skateboards. It was a rag tag team. It
was not taken very seriously. Then its
next evolution was becoming this threat.
A threat to social media companies, a
threat to television and Hollywood. Then
it entered a third phase where it is
obvious. It's just it's just there. It
is the sleeping giant of modern media.
But to keep it that way and defy the
metaphorical warheads of politics, AI,
and Tik Tok, YouTube needs the future
Lonely Girl 15s and boxies of the world
to trust it. They formed the bedrock of
the platform's success and for the first
time they no longer need to stay
subscribed.
>> Um, I think that's about it. Bye.
[Music]